My dear brothers and sisters, I pray you
are all keeping well. Welcome to class
number two. And we begin as always by
praising Allah subhana wa ta'ala.
Alhamdulillah.
We begin by praising Allah subhana wa
ta'ala and thanking him and seeking his
aid and assistance. We seek refuge in
Allah from the evil of our souls and
from our sins. And I testify that
whomsoever Allah subhana wa ta'ala
guides, there's no one to lead us. And
allows to stray, then there is no guide
for him. And I pray that Allah subhanana
wa ta'ala grants us knowledge which is
beneficial. And everything that we learn
today is placed on our scale of good
deeds and is not made a proof against us
and thus being placed on our uh scale of
sins. I hope you've all kept well
throughout the week. We're going to jump
straight to
it. We're going to be getting into the
uh surah itself today.
So we begin with the verses where Allah
subhana wa ta'ala
says
alhamdulillah so now let us begin with
this actually I just want to quickly
check something just want to make sure
okay alhamdulillah everyone can hear me
and everyone is responding perfect I
just wanted to check that so now let's
get back to this
um okay there we So now let's start off
with some basic etiquets with the Quran
which is when you start reciting the
Quran you you always start
with whether you're starting from the
beginning of a surah or you're starting
from uh the middle of a surah you always
begin
with you seek refuge in Allah subhanahu
wa ta'ala from the cursed shan and this
is what Allah subhana wa ta'ala commands
in the Quran that when who uh recite the
Quran, seek refuge in Allah. Seek refuge
in Allah. That is etiquette number one.
eticate number two that when you begin
reciting from the beginning of a surah
you begin
withman and this is why you will see
that in the mus itself every single
surah begins
withman with the exception of surah toba
with the exception of surah toba now
scholars have mentioned that
theman is included at the beginning of
every surah even though it is not a part
of the surah itself. It is not a part of
the surah itself with the exception
of inah the statement
of is actually a verse in the middle of
the surah itself. Allah subhana wa
ta'ala he says that this letter is from
and it
begins and it begins
withman. So that is the only time where
the statement
ofman is actually a part of a verse in
the Quran. in all other places according
to the majority of scholars it is not a
verse of the surah itself but it is
still a part of the Quran in terms of
the etiquette of reciting uh over it now
there's a deeper on is the a part ofah
fath or not we're not going to get into
that but it seems that the majority are
also of the opinion that the baselah uh
is not a part ofah fata itself is not a
part ofah fat itself and this is
something where uh difference of opinion
goes back to the time of the prophet
sallallahu alaihi wasallam. So it's not
something that we will be able to
resolve uh here in our times but it's
good to know these things. So when you
begin reciting from the beginning you
say and then you
say if you're reciting from the middle
then you should
say and then to begin reciting. Now,
here's an interesting uh tidbit, which
is, is there a difference between
writing and reading in terms of the way
that we address? And the answer is yes.
Scholars mention that when you begin
writing a letter or uh an essay or an
article or a book, you always begin the
writing
withman. And this is based upon how the
prophet sallallahu alaihi wasallam wrote
his letters. And also what we find in
that began his letter
withman however when you begin by a
sermon and you're giving a lecture then
at that time the etiquette is to begin
with alhamdulillah or something related
to alhamdulillah like alhamdulillah
something along those lines and this was
the etiquette of the prophet sallallahu
alaihi wasallam and is the etiquette in
the Arabic language. This is something
that um you know it often uh doesn't get
noticed but this is something good to
know that when you begin writing you
begin
withman when you begin speaking you
begin by praising Allah subhana wa
ta'ala and that is exactly what Allah
subhana wa t'ala does in the Quran and
that is why you see that no surah
actually
has as a verse with and of itself with
the difference of opinion of fat uh at
the beginning of the surah and uh all of
them begin with uh whatever Allah
subhana wa t'ala chooses to say with the
exception of the five suras that
actually begin with alhamdulillah and
the very first of them being fat the
very first of them being fat. So there
are five suras that begin with
alhamdulillah altogether they are
fatah and surah fat. These are the five
suras that begin with alhamdulillah. Now
what does alhamdulillah actually mean
and why is it appropriate to begin with
alhamdulillah? So in the Arabic language
there are different ways uh to express
appreciation and gratitude. The three
main ways of the many ways that are
there are sh and
hum and mud. What is the difference
between all of three? I'll try to
explain it in a in a summarized fashion.
So the hum is something that is done
verbally and is expressed to someone
that innately has all good and positive
characteristics. And in the case of
Allah subhana wa ta'ala, perfection.
Allah subhana wa ta'ala is perfection
and there's nothing better or greater uh
than Allah or or or nicer or more
beautiful than Allah subhanahu wa
ta'ala. So when we say alhamdulillah it
is the recognition that all praise,
gratitude, glory, thanks um magnificence
is due to Allah subhana wa ta'ala alone.
Not just for the favors that Allah
subhana wa ta'ala has done for us but
also for who Allah subhanana wa ta'ala
is. So someone can be praised for the
favors that they give and do. And then
someone can also be praised for who they
are. So the nature of Allah subhana wa
ta'ala is so perfect and beautiful that
all praise is due to Allah subhanahu wa
ta'ala alone. That all praise is due to
Allah subhanana wa ta'ala alone. So that
is h mud is something that can be done
voluntarily or involuntarily. It can be
true or it cannot be true. So you can
almost think uh mud is like a
compliment. So sometimes human beings
will compliment each other just for the
sake of making other people feel nice.
So it may not necessarily feel true but
you compliment them for the sake of feel
making them feel nice and um you know
lightening the mood uh before you begin
the conversation something along those
lines. Or we've seen people that you
know kings used to persecute uh the
poets that if you don't you know create
verses of poetry praising me then you
know I will punish you. That would be
considered a form of mud. So they're
involuntarily praising the individual.
So it can be voluntary or involuntary
and often it is uh verbal as well. Often
it is verbal as well. Then the third um
form of praise in the Arabic language is
shuk and shuk is a response to a gift uh
or something that is is done for you
right something kind or something
generous that has been given to you or
that has been done uh for you. So you
perform shuk and shuk is a statement on
the tongue. It is also an action on the
limb and it is also a state of the
heart. It is also a state of the heart.
So Allah subhana wa ta'ala commands the
family
of perform in their
actions right. So they are commanded
with
u gratitude on their limbs. And this
means to use whatever Allah whatever
blessings Allah subhana wa ta'ala has
given you to get closer to Allah subhana
wa ta'ala. Whatever Allah has given you
use it to get closer to Allah subhanahu
wa ta'ala. So that is how you perform
shuk on the limbs. Then shuk on the
tongue is to say statements like
alhamdulillah statements like
alhamdulillah and then you have many
other statements actually you know uh
I'll go on a very quick tangent right
over here. One of the greatest ways of
praising Allah subhana wa ta'ala is from
the hadith
of that one day the prophet sallallahu
alaihi wasallam saw her as she as he was
leaving the house and she was making the
vikar of Allah subhana wa ta'ala and
then when he came back and you can
imagine some time had gone by she's
still making the vikar of Allah but
she's so tired and fatigued that she's
holding on to a rope to keep her up
straight that she can't sit up straight
or stand up straight anymore due to the
fact that of how fatigued she So the
prophet sallallahu alaihi wasallam
taught her should I not teach you
something that if you were to say it
three times it would suffice you for all
of the that you have made for all of the
that you have made. And the prophet
sallallahu alaihi wasallam taught her to
say subhan
all the prophet sallallahu alaihi
wasallam taught her to make this
statement that is beautiful. It's beyond
uh my ability to translate it on the
spot but it is basically uh the epitome
of praise of Allah subhana wa ta'ala and
then also
um from the dua of the prophet
sallallahu alaihi wasallam and for
reference you can look this up in Muslim
the book of dua as a part of the morning
and evening remembrances as a part of
the morning and evening remembrances.
Number two from the um dua of the
prophet sallallahu alaihi wasallam he
used to say
that oh Allah uh I seek refuge in you. I
seek refuge in your uh happiness uh uh
over your
anger and I seek refuge in your
pardoning from your p from your
punishment and I seek refuge in you from
you and I'm unable to enumerate your
praises. You are as you yourself have
praised
yourself. And subhan Allah, you know,
just to share a beautiful memory, I
remember in the first year uh when I got
accepted into the Islamic University of
Medina, the first Ramadan that I was
there, uh there was a sheh by the name
of
Hussein, he was one of the imams uh in
Alami alabi and I don't know if he's
still there or not, but when he used to
lead
the salah and the of the w he used to
make this dua and I found it so uh
intriguing subhan Allah like was this
something he came up with himself and I
eventually researched it and this is
from the or the dua of the prophet
sallallahu alaihi wasallam and this is a
very good dua to
memorize now what is this tied into and
just to repeat that last part that you
are as you have praised yourself you are
as you have praised yourself. So now we
know that Allah subhana wa ta'ala is
perfect and perfect praise only comes
from Allah subhana wa tala and thus we
say you are as you have praised
yourself. But if you go back into the
Quran particularly
inah what does Allah subhana wa tala
tell
us that if you were to try to
enumerate the blessings that Allah
subhana wa ta has given us you would
never be able to do so. you would never
be able to do so. So now if we are
unable to enumerate the blessings of
Allah subhana wa ta'ala, how do we ever
show gratitude? How do we ever show
gratitude? You show gratitude by
praising Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala the
way he has praised himself. And this is
why
in the prophet sallallahu alaihi
wasallam he teaches us that the one that
says alhamdulillah to a blessing has
returned greater than that which he has
received sallallahu alaihi wasallam or
as the prophet sallallahu alaihi
wasallam said. So alhamdulillah is the
best of uh ways to show appreciation and
gratitude uh to Allah subhana wa tala.
So that is the shuk on the tongue. And
the last state is the shuk of the heart
which is the recognition of of blessings
and living uh in a state of gratitude
constantly you know recognizing that
everything that we have from good is
from Allah subhana wa ta'ala and that we
are um deficient in our gratitude to
Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala.
He says that anytime Allah subhana wa
ta'ala guides you to make gratitude to
Allah then gratitude is due to Allah for
that guidance. Meaning it is uh a full
circle that you'll never get out of of
being grateful to Allah subhana wa
ta'ala because even guidance from Allah
to show appreciation and thanks to him
is something that is worthy of praise
and gratitude. So that is just uh the
introduction to alhamdulillah.
Now this is known asal this is known
asal and that is the primary and most
beautiful name of Allah subhana wa
ta'ala and there's much discussion that
can be had over here but we refer to as
Allah
asal the most beautiful and eloquent and
primary name of Allah subhanahu wa
ta'ala is it something that um comes
from another name or is it a name that
is exclusive from itself
Some of the scholars they said that
Allah comes
from the one uh the only one worthy of
worship being combined becomes Allah
subhana wa ta'ala and other scholars
have said that no Allah is a unique name
within and of itself and is not
extracted from any other word in the
Arabic language. The prophet sallallahu
alaihi wasallam he says he teaches us
that Allah subhana wa ta'ala has a name
that if we were to ask him by it then
Allah subhana wa ta'ala would respond
and he mentions that it is mentioned in
the verses of Alan. So from
the of the scholars uh they said that it
is the combination of al and that this
is a combination that when you ask Allah
subhana wa tala by it then Allah subhana
wa ta'ala will answer it. Other scholars
said that if you ask Allah subhana wa
ta'ala by Allah then Allah subhanahu wa
ta'ala will answer it. So if you look
at how does ayat
begin no that is not how
ayati begins. Um it is escaping my my
mind right now because I have two other
thoughts that I want to share with you
that I don't want to skip. with the
point being and we'll we'll get back to
this is that
um is the the is the name of Allahh that
when you ask Allahhana by it the
combination of and the word Allah
subhanahu wa'ta'ala the word Allah
Allahal that these are the names of
Allahhana that when you ask Allahh by
them he responds so Allah subhana wa
ta'ala begins by saying pray All praise
and magnificence and glory is for Allah
subhanahu wa ta'ala the one that sent
upon his slave the book right so now the
concept of anzah is to reveal something
and to send something down so reveal can
mean that you uncover something and it
has become revealed but greater than
this it has descent from the heavens it
has descent from the heavens so there's
multiple things that we have to
understand over that Allah subhana wa
ta'ala he sent something down from
himself so it is going to be magnificent
and glorious and perfect in any way
possible because it is from Allah
subhanahu wa'ta'ala it is from Allah
subhanahu wa ta'ala number two this
establishes the of Allah subhana wa
ta'ala or the highness uh or elevation
of Allah subhana wa ta'ala above his
creation now a part of our is that we
believe that Allah subhana wa ta'ala is
above his creation but we do not know uh
how and we do not ask how right um we we
we do not uh dwell deeper into it. We
believe in the uh highness of Allah
subhanahu wa ta'ala and out of the
highness of Allah subhana wa tala he
sent something from above to the
messenger of Allah sallallahu alaihi
wasallam and this is why when you look
at the revelation of the Quran the
revelation of the Quran was given to
Jirel and Jirel brought it to the lowest
heavens and then from the lowest heavens
uh the Quran was revealed to the prophet
sallallahu alaii wasallam and you can
refer to uh the class that I did with on
the book of revelation uh from sah bkari
we discussed how uh revelation came down
to the prophet sallallahu alaihi
wasallam so revelation came
down meaning Muhammad sallallahu alaihi
wasallam now I want us to understand the
term we will often translate as slave
and over here we've translated it as uh
as
um as
servant now when you are a slave and
serve servant to Allah. This is
considered something praiseworthy. In
fact, it is the highest level of praise
that a human being can receive. And that
is why Allahhana wa ta chose it for
Muhammad sallallahu alaihi wasallam. But
when you are a slave to anything else,
it is the greatest form of criticism
that anyone can receive. It is the
greatest form of criticism that anyone
can receive.
Servitude to Allah brings about love and
hope. Servitude to other than Allah
brings about pain and misery. Servitude
to Allah is rewarded with paradise.
Servitude to other than Allah is
compensated with punishment and hardship
and calamity. Right? So there's all of
these concepts that are taken into it.
So when we look at the term slave and
servant due to our cultural conditioning
we will always think as this is
something negative but in light of being
a slave and a servant to your creator
this is considered the highest form of
praise. This is considered the highest
form of praise and thus Allah subhana wa
ta'ala chose it for the messenger of
Allah sallallahu alaihi wasallam.
Now what we want to expand on uh over
here is that why is this the greatest
form of praise? It is the greatest form
of praise because
everyone will be alive but not everyone
will fulfill their purpose of creation.
As Allah subhana wa tala he tells us
in that I have not created the mankind
in jin except for my worship for my
servitude right so everyone will be
alive but not everyone will fulfill
their purpose of creation and if Allah
subhana wa ta'ala has given you the ti
to fulfill your purpose of creation from
time to time not everyone will uh
perfect it and not everyone will do it
all the time. Whereas the messenger of
Allah sallallahu alaihi wasallam was a
servant and slave of Allah subhana wa
ta'ala at all times at all times in all
of his actions. So this is why it is
considered the highest form of praise
and before Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala
shows us the
magnificence of the Quran. He teaches us
the significance of Muhammad sallallahu
alaihi wasallam that without Muhammad
sallallahu alaihi wasallam there is no
Quran that is being revealed to humanity
as the last book. Allahh chose him as
the conduit for this most magnificent of
books to be revealed. So the greatest of
books it was revealed to the greatest of
prophets through the greatest of angels
through the one and only great creator
sustainer and only one worthy of worship
Allah subhanahu wa'ta'ala. So that is
the significance of this uh part over
here. Alab generally refers to something
which with that which is written and
during the time of the prophet
sallallahu alaihi wasallam the Quran for
the most part was an oral tradition
which was revealed and memoriz which was
recited and memorized but then there
there were
some writers some scribes that would
write the Quran down and the ultimate
goal was to turn it into this book that
would be the ultimate guide for humanity
till the day of judgment. till the day
of judgment. Now the fact that Allah
subhana wa ta'ala says that he has
revealed it from himself necessitates
that it is perfect in every way and this
is why Allah subhana wa ta emphasizes
this
point and there is no crooked
crookedness in this book. There are no
contradictions in this book. Now this is
something very important to understand
that our natural reaction to the Quran
is one of submission that we submit to
everything that Allah subhana wa ta'ala
has revealed in the Quran. Everything
that Allah subhana wa ta'ala has
revealed in the Quran. Now what if we
come across a verse in the Quran which
to us may seem contradictory which to us
may seem contradictory or what if we
come across a hadith of the prophet
sallallahu alaihi wasallam which we feel
is in contradiction to the Quran or to
other a hadith or to even what we know
in reality in terms of science. What is
the methodology that we're meant to
have? And this is where I want to
emphasize this method methodology. It'll
be for your benefit and inshallah for
your uh students and for your uh
children and for your siblings and
anyone else that you have this
discussion with. But the first thing you
want to do is always verify
authenticity. Always verify
authenticity. So when it comes to the
Quran, you don't need to verify
authenticity because the Quran all of it
is authentic. When it comes to the
hadith of the prophet sallallahu alaihi
wasallam, you need to verify
authenticity. Is this something that the
prophet sallallahu alaihi wasallam
actually said or did or is it not? If it
is not, then we reject it and there's no
need to go any further. But once it has
been verified to be authentic, then step
number two, we look at what is the uh
context of this revelation, the context
of this action, why did it take place,
what is the story behind it. Then number
three, you look at traditionally what
have scholars said about this verse,
said about this hadith and how has this
tradition been passed forward to us. And
then the fourth and last thing that you
do is from a contemporary standpoint,
particularly with issues that are are a
challenge in this day and
age, refer to contemporary scholarship
to see what they have said about such
ayat and such a hadith. And that is the
methodology of um dealing with verses
and a hadith which on the apparent seem
to be contradictory or do not seem to to
settle well in the heart. But as imbnus,
one of the great scholars of hadith said
that anyone that finds a contradiction
in the sunnah, let him bring it to me
and I will rectify it for them. meaning
that there is no contradiction between
the Quran and the Sunnah or the Quran
and the intellect or the Sunnah and the
intellect because the source of all of
these three things is the same. The
sound intellect is from Allah, the Quran
is from Allah and the sunnah as a
concept is from Allah subhanahu wa
ta'ala. So in its essence there should
not be any contradiction. So this is why
Allah subhana wa ta'ala
says that there is no contradiction in
it. There is no deviance in it. There is
no crookedness in it. It is all
straight. It is all fluid. It is all
from the same source from Allah
subhanahu
wa'ta'ala. Then Allah subhana ta goes on
to say and I wanted to spend you know
quite a bit. I know that was a long
introduction for verse number one. We
will not be able to go into uh such
detail for all of the verses but we will
try to uh expand on the ones that need
expanding. So then Allah subhana wa
ta'ala goes on to
say that Allahh goes on to say that he
has made it straight and also something
that makes other things straight. Right?
So, soim is something that is straight
and
rectified. Is something that rectifies
meaning that if you hold on to the book
of Allah subhana wa ta'ala and you take
it as a form of guidance and you take it
um as a as a way of life as a manual uh
as a code of conduct it will rectify
your life to the way that you're meant
to live your life to the way that you
are meant to live your life. And this is
why to the best of our ability, we are
meant to have a daily rectifi uh a daily
word of Quran, a daily recitation of the
Quran. So every day you want to make
sure that you reciting a little bit of
the Quran. This is your way of going
back to this manual that Allah subhana
wa ta'ala has sent down. Please excuse
me as I I take a sip of water.
So this manual is something that will
rectify you. Now you look at the balance
of this manual that Allah subhana wa
ta'ala has sent that it warns you of
this severe punishment that may come
from Allah subhana wa ta'ala. But then
also it gives glad tidings to the
believers. Also gives glad tidings to
the believers. Now there's so much to
expand on over here. Subhan Allah.
That's so beautiful. So that when you
look at the concept of warning, Allah
subhana wa ta'ala just says that this
warning is coming from Allah subhanahu
wa ta'ala about a severe punishment that
exists about a severe punishment that
exists. And this warning is to both
believers and to non-believers. There's
no specification over here. So it
applies to believers and non-believers.
Whereas the glad tidings that Allahh has
given is only for the believers. is only
for the believers. So this shows us that
there's the threat and then there's the
actual consequence. For the disbeliever,
the disbeliever has the threat and will
also have uh the consequence or the
non-Muslim will have the threat and the
consequence. Whereas the believer has
the threat to ward off any evil
inclination or desire to do bad but does
not have the consequence at the end.
Does not the consequence is not
mentioned uh for the believer at the
end. Now why is that the case? This is
because the good deeds that we do they
will wipe away the bad deeds that we do.
When we make and toba then it wipes away
the sins uh that we've committed. when
we do uh major good deeds like
particularly when you look at the uh uh
the action of jamat inj because that's
what's coming to my mind right now that
is one of the deeds that even the major
sins can be wiped out through the the
stoning in jamat in hajj right um so the
believers through their deeds will have
their sins forgiven this is something uh
that is uh that they can do for
themselves but then there's also the
concept of like the intercession of the
prophet sallallahu alaihi wasallam the
intercession of the of the Quran the
intercession of the of the martyrs and
the intercession of the of the righteous
people in general by the will and
permission of Allah subhana wa ta'ala
right so that is how the believers get
out of the consequence Allahhanaa has
made so many avenues right oh and I
forgot to mention also the uh the the
patience that we show which is a good
deed in of itself over the hardships and
calamities that we face in this life and
uh the next. So those are the uh various
avenues that Allah subhana wa ta'ala has
created for the believers out of his
infinite mercy. So the threat is there
to ward off our behavior and to change
our behavior and as long as we live a
righteous life, it remains a threat and
it doesn't actually impact us. But for
the non-Muslim up and until they accept
Islam, their good deeds are not going to
avail them in the hereafter. Their good
deeds will not avail them in the
hereafter. their good deeds will only
benefit them in the life of this world.
Allahhana tala rewards their good in the
life of this world. So that is the
beginning of
this that Allah subhana wa ta gives glad
tidings. Now what is the function of the
glad tiding? It is the exact opposite of
the threat. So just like the threat is
meant to ward an action or behavior or
belief away from you,
the concept of giving a glad tiding is
meant to be an encouragement for you to
do a good deed uh make a statement and
and have a belief. It is meant as a form
of encouragement. And so Allahh is
encouraging the believers that do as
many good deeds as you can and you will
have a very generous reward in
compensation for it in in compensation
to it. Um
uh so to do righteous deeds and over
here you know scholars mentioned that
there's a a tie remember we were talking
about last year how certain ayat are
tied to one another that there's a over
here uh in the first verse of surah with
the last uh sorry the second verse of
surah with the last verse of surah where
Allah subhana wa ta'ala he tells us um
that whoever
So here Allah subhana wa ta'ala
introduces us to the concept of what a
good deed is meaning that you have to
follow the example of the prophet
sallallahu alaihi wasallam and then
Allah subhana wa ta'ala builds on that
in the very last verse that you do good
deeds meaning you follow the example of
the prophet sallallahu alaihi wasallam
and you do not associate any partners
with Allah. So the concept of las and
the concept of doing all actions
sincerely for the sake of Allah
subhanahu wa ta'ala and following the
sunnah of the prophet sallallahu alaihi
wasallam or the best possible way uh of
worshiping Allah subhana wa ta'ala that
is what the term good deed actually
entails and encompasses. Now when you do
these good
deeds that when you do this you will
have a good reward and in the Quran
whenever the word is used in this sense
it is referring to Jenna. It is
referring to Jenna and that is which no
eye has seen no uh ear has heard of and
no heart has been able to truly uh
comprehend. Right? And that is what
Jenna is. It is the epitome of bliss. It
is the epitome of all blessings. It is
the epitome of of generosity. And
Allahhana has prepared it for his
righteous believers. May Allah subhana
wa ta'ala make us from amongst them. A
mean and they will remain therein
forever. Now let's discuss uh some uh
from some various standpoints. the
concept of Jenna and Jannam. So there's
unanimous consensus that Jenna will be
everlasting that Jenna will be
everlasting and it uh Allah from the
time that Allahhana has created it and
it exists right now till eternity ja
will continue to exist. Whereas for
jahannam you will find a difference of
opinions even amongst Sunni scholars.
even amongst Sunni scholars but they are
a minority and a I would even say a
fringe opinion that jannam exists
already because it has already been
created but there is a time that will
come
that jannam will cease to exist that is
the minority opinion and the majority of
scholars that even jannam will exist
forever even jannam will exist forever
and it's very fascinating as to why
scholars held this opinion because one
of the attributes of Allah subhana wa
ta'ala that is constantly emphasized
throughout the Quran is one of mercy. So
Jenna existing for eternity is an act of
mercy and one can comprehend that. But
how do you reconcile the existence of um
jannam for eternity with the concept of
mercy and some of the scholars they went
to this opinion that jannam will exist
till all of the people have received
their due punishment. And once they have
received their due punishment, then
jannam will cease to exist at that point
and Allah subhana wa ta'ala will uh make
it cease to exist. Now how do scholars
respond to this is that the people who
knew that Allah subhana wa t'ala was
their creator and knew that Allah
subhana wa ta'ala was the only one
worthy of worship yet they still denied
Allah subhana wa ta'ala this due right
then the act of mercy is justice and
justice is in rewarding those that
followed the rules and regulations of
Allah and thus they received Jenna and
justice is also that those that knew
right from wrong yet chose wrong then
justice is that they receive their
punishment and a punishment uh fits the
crime and the crime over here is of
which is the greatest sin that can be
committed and thus jannam will exist
forever so that's sort of how they
approach this topic but when Allah
subhana t
says this is referring to the believers
in paradise that you will remain in
paradise forever now the beauty of this
concept is in how limited Our
understanding is, can you think of
anything that you would like to be doing
for an eternity? Meaning that would you
want to sleep for an eternity? Would you
want to, you know, eat for an eternity?
Would you want to hang out with your
friends for an eternity? Would you want
to hang out with your your family and
and have activities have activities with
your family for an eternity? You
wouldn't, right? Because in our mind, as
we know in this dunya, you will get
bored and you will get fed up and you'll
want change. You'll want something else.
But the beauty of Jenna is that there is
no boredom. You do not get fed up. It is
just eternal enjoyment. And the
longevity of each form of enjoyment is
exponentially increased. So everything
that you savor and enjoy is multiplied
and increased exponentially. And we I
only give that example because that's
the only way you can understand
increment. But it is from zero to
infinity. How do you go from zero to
infinity? You can't. But is the closest
thing that we can comprehend. And that
is the level of enjoyment that Allah
subhana wa
ta'ala promises the believers. And I'll
I'll I'll just uh end off on this note
for this verse. Allah subhanaa tala he
tells us about Jenna. And again may
Allahh make us from uh the inhabitants
of
genital he
says that the believers will have each
and every single thing that they desire
and we will still have more to give
them. We will still have more to give
them. And subhan Allah that boggles the
mind. How can Allah subhana wa ta'ala
have more to give you when you have
everything that you desire? Like what is
left beyond what you desire? And this
teaches us that human beings in this
earth were insatiable. Right? As the
prophet sallallahu alaihi wasallam tells
us that if the children of Adam had one
valley of gold, they would want another
and nothing would suffice them until
they have dust. Meaning the the until
they they they pass away and they're in
their graves, right? They will never be
satisfied. But when it comes to Jenna,
yes, you are insatiable in the sense
that you will always want more and Allah
subhana wa tala will always have more to
give you. Subhan Allah. And even beyond
more of what you could desire, Allah has
something beyond that. And the is to
they said it is to see the beautiful
face of Allah subhana wa ta'ala. May
Allah grant us that uh noble and
generous
gift. Now let's go on to verse number
four.
and this book. So now we've gone from
the disbelievers to the believers back
to the disbelievers going back to that
warning that Allah subhana wa ta is
talking about. Now what is Allah subhana
wa ta'ala warning against and this is
the primary warning in the
Quran and this is to warn those that say
that Allah subhana wa ta'ala has taken a
child has taken a child. Now, who is
this addressing to? In our mind, we may
think that this naturally is applying to
the Christians. But in the Quran, Allah
subhana wa ta'ala shows us or tells us
about two other groups that attributed
uh children to Allah subhana wa ta'ala.
The Quraysh attributed daughters to
Allah subhana wa ta'ala. Some of them in
the form of angels. And then Allah
subhana wa ta'ala also tells us about a
specific group from Bani is that said
that
um was the son of Allah that was the son
of Allah. So Christians uh Christianity
uh uh so I guess most Christians some uh
adherence uh to to to Judaism and the
polytheists of Quraysh they all
attributed children to Allah subhana wa
ta'ala. So Allah subhana t is warning
them. Now we said that this was a Meccan
surah and the context of this verse is
remember the Quraysh went to uh the
Jewish tribes in Medina and asked for
you know questions that we can ask the
prophet sallallahu alaihi sallallahu
alaihi wasallam to prove if he's
actually a prophet or not. And it's
amazing how Allah subhana wa ta'ala is
addressing anyone and everyone that the
prophet will eventually come to meet
either from the polytheists of the
Quraysh or the Christians or the the
Jews that Allah subhana wa ta'ala is
saying that this is a warning this book
is a warning for anyone that will commit
shik with Allah subhana wa ta'ala and
one of the ways that people perform shik
with Allah is to attribute to Allah that
which is not befitting of being
attributed to Allah and that is attribut
ing a child to Allah subhana wa ta'ala.
Allah subhanana wa
ta'ala he does not beget nor was he
begotten. Allah subhana wa ta'ala is
independent and Allah subhana wa ta'ala
is self-existent. Allah subhana wa
ta'ala is not in need of anyone. Allah
subhana wa ta'ala is not in need of
anyone. And then Allahh goes on to
say that they have no knowledge of it
nor had their fathers. Grave is the word
that comes out of their mouth. They
speak nothing except a lie. So now here
Allah subhana wa ta'ala establishes a
methodology for us that if you're going
to make a statement you have to have
proof and evidence for it. So when it
comes to Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala when
it comes to the dean of Allah subhanahu
wa ta'ala you have to have evidence for
everything that you say and you have to
be able to back it up. And in fact even
when it comes to Islamic law one of the
fundamental principles of Islamic law
is that the one that is going to make a
claim has to provide evidence has to
provide evidence. So here Allah subhana
wa ta'ala is saying that they do not
have any evidence and the evidence that
Allah subhana ta is referring to is and
is the highest level of knowledge that
gives us certainty that the highest
level of knowledge which gives us
certainty they do not have it they do
not have any evidence for it nor did
their fathers so they're just recklessly
following a tradition and this shows us
that Islam discourages us following
tradition for the sake of tradition so
to go on another quick tangent. Some
people will say, you know what,
Halloween may have been paganistic, but
it is no longer, you know, uh symbolic
of that paganism. Christmas may have
been a Christian uh celebration at one
point, but it is no longer a Christian
tren uh celebration. It is more of a a
consumer uh tradition now. Right? So
this is a a senseless thing that why
would Muslims want to be a part of it
whether it is religious or nonreligious?
It is a tradition that has no evidence
behind it and they're just senselessly
following uh their forefathers meaning
their
tradition that how severe how grotesque
is the statement of attributing a
partner to Allah of attributing a son to
Allah. How grotesque it actually is. And
as grotesque as the statement of shik is
then there is nothing more beautiful
than the statement
ofahillah there's nothing more beautiful
ofahahahahahahahahahahahahahahahahahahahahahahahahahahahahahahahahahahahahahahahahillah
that there's no one worthy of worship
except Allah subhanahu wa'ta'ala there's
no one worthy of worship except Allah
subhanana wa
ta'ala that they only speak lies and
when you come forth without any evidence
and you just senselessly uh follow
tradition and then you make statements
without understanding the gravity and
severity of it attributing a partner or
a child to Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala.
This is a great great lie. This is a
great great lie. Now some of the class
notes the Christians were the ones
coming with the questions. This is not
necessarily true. As we mentioned the
historical context was that the Makkah
and Qur went to the Jewish tribes. So
all three of them are included but they
need to take care of their own religion
first because they claim that Allah has
a son. So over the periods of time
Christianity was distorted and if you
study the Nyin creed from what I
remember the Nyin creed was the first
point in time which was approximately
300 years after that the creed of um of
the trinity rather actually became
formalized within the Christian church
uh about 300 years after Isaam. So, you
know, this this concept of of
Christianity having to look at its
history and when it became for the the
association and the trinity came
formalized is something that needs to be
looked at. They are asking things that
they don't even know the answer to. No
one in their tradition truly knows the
reality of the story even though it took
place in their own tradition. So, this
is referring to the story of surah,
right? So even though this was refers to
in the Torah uh of old which is accepted
by both uh Christians uh and Jews the
reality of this story they are uh not
familiar with and people are criticized
for how they ask questions but never for
asking questions.
So over here they were asking questions
to prove the prophet sallallahu alaihi
wasallam was not a prophet and that is
an ill intent and when you come with an
ill intent then that is something that
you are criticized for. Questions are
encouraged to be asked but with respect
and for the sake of learning with
sincerity behind them with sincerity
behind them.
And perhaps you oh Muhammad sallallahu
alaihi wasallam are going to bring
yourself destruction are going to bring
yourself harm due to these groups not
accepting Islam not accepting what
guidance you are bringing to them. So
now here the prophet sallallahu alaihi
wasallam is being
praised and discouraged at the same
time. So he's being praised for his will
towards humanity in terms of wanting to
guide all of them. He's being praised
for the softness of his heart of wishing
guiding guidance and goodness for
everyone. But then he is also being
discouraged that you Muhammad sallallahu
alaihi wasallam you're just meant to
provide the message. It is Allah subhana
wa ta'ala that guides. Guidance was
never in your heart to begin with in
your hands to begin with. you just bring
the message and it is Allahhana tala
that guides. So do not get you know
affixiated on whether people uh are
guided or not but focus on are you
conveying the message? Are you conveying
the message? So here's there's a couple
of things to to look at that you know if
we're looking at internalizing the
message over here we as followers of the
prophet sallallahu alaihi wasallam we
want good for everyone and we want good
for all of humanity and the greatest
form of good is that of guidance and
then everything that follows it and then
everything that follows it. So in an
ideal world if everyone were to receive
guidance there should be nothing more
beloved to us. Even if they're the most
staunchest enemies that we have, if they
are guided, we praise Allah subhana wa
ta'ala for that because Allah subhana wa
ta'ala guides whom he wills. And this is
like a a principle to keep in mind.
Allah subhana t gives the dunya to
everyone but he only gives guidance to
those whom he loves. Allah will give the
dunya to everyone but he only gives
guidance to those whom he loves. And
then number two, how does it impact us
when people aren't guided? So there's a
fine line where we should feel pain and
we should feel grief when people aren't
guided and we should look at, you know,
is there something that we can do
better. But at the end of the day, do
not get affixiated on the result that
even if they don't get guided, don't say
that it's all your fault or or something
along those lines where you still where
you where you harm yourself emotionally
and psychologically. like the prophet
sallallahu alaihi wasallam he took it
very very severe when they would not uh
accept Islam when they would not accept
Islam but it had not yet been decreed
right and as you know during the fatka a
lot of these people ended up accepting
Islam a lot of these people ended up
accepting Islam so those are some of the
things to take away uh from this verse
that the grief the prophet sallallahu
alaihi wasallam faced in these people uh
not accepting Islam was severe And even
the prophetam is being reminded over
here that you do not guide. You just
convey the message and we want to
internalize. We want good for everyone.
We should feel some pain when people do
not feel uh receive guidance because at
the end of the day that we know what the
final destinations are going to look
like. But we also need to remind
ourselves that at the end of the day it
is only Allah subhana wa ta'ala who can
guide and he guides those whom he loves
and gives the dunya to everyone.
Then Allahh goes on to
say that indeed we have placed
everything on this on the earth as an
adornment to test
people which of them and who of them
will have the best deeds who of them
will have the best deeds. So here Allah
subhana wa ta'ala is telling us that the
primary reason why people will not
accept Islam when we approach this from
ai perspective. So there's a concept of
guidance as an act of ti from Allah and
if human beings are sincere and they ask
Allah subhana wa ta'ala for guidance
Allah subhana wa ta will guide them. But
what prevents people from seeking
guidance? What prevents people from
seeking guidance? It is the allurement
and the attraction of the life of this
world that they're constantly in this
rat race, constantly chasing more power,
more money, more fulfillment of desires
and whatever it is. So Allah subhana wa
ta'ala created the earth as an adornment
to test us which of us will be best
indeed that will you be able to fight
the temptation and use from this dunya
only that which you need to get closer
to Allah subhana wa ta'ala or will it
become a form of distraction for you or
will it become a form of distraction for
you and this is going to be the primary
hindrance for people not accepting Islam
the primary hindrance for not accepting
Islam the lurement of this duny and that
can be broken down into many many uh
subsections and categories. Then Allah
subhana wa ta'ala goes on uh then he
goes on to say that we're testing people
who will be best indeed and this again
ties back to the end of the surah
following the example of the prophet
sallallahu alaihi wasallam and doing
deeds sincerely for the sake of Allah.
Those are the best deeds. Those are the
best deeds. And just like we have uh the
worst of sins like committing shik with
Allah subhana wa ta'ala disobedience to
one's parents uh and and magic and
killing those are all evil and and and
wicked deeds. The best of deeds
are and taking care and uh being
righteous to one's
parents prayer on his proper uh
immediate time. Those are the best of
deeds to Allah subhana wa ta'ala and we
will only know that through the Quran
and through the sunnah of the prophet
sallallahu alaihi wasallam. Then Allah
subhana wa tala goes on to
say that and indeed we will make that
which is upon it into a barren ground.
So while this dunya right now is very
attractive and very appealing as we get
to the day of judgment on the day of
judgment it will be struck it will be
shattered it will be barren and it will
not be alluring at all and that will be
a reminder of the true nature of this
life that on its surface was was very
appealing and attractive but underneath
and its final version is going to be
very ugly and very repugnant and it's
not going to bear anything. Right? A
land that is barren will not bear
anything. Meaning that there is no
continuation of it and the only
continuation after that is that of
either Jenna or Jannam. So Allah subhana
wa ta'ala is saying that this earth that
we create as an adornment that you need
to live upon for the sake of survival
always remember that it will cease to
exist. It's not going to uh continuously
bear fruits for you. It will cease to
bear fruit and then at that point
there's only one of two ways that you're
going either to Jenna or to jannam. So
you have to be working towards the
destination that you want to go to. And
if you're not actively working towards
Jenna, it is feared that people will be
dragged into jannam. And may Allah
subhana wa ta'ala protect us from that.
May Allah subhana wa ta'ala protect us
from
that. In the notes from this section,
there are seven ayat that refer to the
prophet sallallahu alaihi wasallam's
level of concern for the disbelievers
and how much he wanted them to believe.
The mentality of a should be that
regardless of what people do to us, we
should always have concern for their
iman and for their guidance. Zena is
always about something being covered,
right? And the dormant that it it's
something that's put on top, but it it
hides the reality of what's underneath.
The zena on the earth is there for us to
benefit as long as we know that the
reality is that it is a flat and barren
land. That it is a flat and barren land.
Now we get to the actual story of the
people of the book and we'll just read
the verses but the explanation will
begin with the whole entire story itself
next week. So Allahhana wa ta goes on to
say or have you thought that the
companions of the cave and were among
our signs a wonder mention when the
youth retreated to the cave and said our
Lord grant us from yourself a mercy and
prepare for us from our affair right
guidance. Right? This is such a a
beautiful
dua and that's a a beautiful verse uh or
a beautiful dua to conclude uh the
section on. Now what we want to just
quickly do before we open up the floor
for for questions and I'll I'll address
to your questions and comments
inshallah. what is the relationship
between the introduction of surahul kah
to uh the story of the people of the
cave. So in the beginning of surah kah
Allah subhana wa ta teaches us about a
mindset a mindset which is always of one
of being grateful to Allah subhanahu wa
ta'ala and how Allah subhana wa ta'ala
is perfect and all praise is due to him.
Allah subhana wa ta'ala teaches us about
his elevation and how Allah subhana wa
ta'ala oversees all of his creation as
in and is in control of all of their
affairs. How Allah subhanaa tala sent
down this perfect book to this uh to the
greatest of all uh creation uh or
greatest of his creation uh and and
prophets and messengers and human beings
Muhammad sallallahu alaihi wasallam. So
all of this is tied into the fact that
all of this is there to remind us that
the greatest good is and the greatest
sin is that of is the that of and then
Allahh starts off with the story of the
people of the cave that they were trying
to hold on to their and save them
themselves from shik and the steps that
they took they made dua to Allah subhana
wa tala as a primary step and then they
took action of retreating into this
cave. So always begin all of the things
that you're trying to achieve with dua
and then take the physical steps. Retie
your camel and put your trust in Allah.
And this is uh what is uh being tied
into into this introduction. And Allah
subhanahu wa ta'ala knows best. Now
let's uh uh get out of this. And how do
I get out of screen sharing? There we
go. Stop screen sharing. There we go.
Alhamdulillah. I am back. So now let's
go back. So we have
Teresa, we have we have Kima, we have
Mariam, we have Fatuma, we have Sonia,
we have Mustafa Fra and everyone else
that
said Nadia, which surah was that? That
was thank you Sarah for answering that.
Uh Sema said surah Toba. So surah Toba
does not have bas prior to it. Uh
whereas all other suras do but it is not
a part of the surah but it is a part of
the Quran has the
um has uh
the as a middle verse in it. Uh so the
name is Jalala uh with a with a lamb not
a nonal
um right um and that is the beginning of
uh and thank you for that. Okay so now
do we have any questions comments or
concerns on today's class inshallah can
you please mention the second dua where
to find this? So the dua that I referred
to was
Allah. Let's see if I can find it for
you right now. Oh Allah, I seek
refuge in
you in your uh pleasure from your anger.
Let's go for that.
Um, okay. Here we
go. That is the dua right there. And
then we have questions over here. You
mentioned and which other name? uh that
is uh the combination
of
so thank you so so much for that why we
should look at contemporary after seeing
that a lot of division is happening
isn't it to go back to early work as it
will have less differences of opinions
um so great question over here so does
contemporary scholarly commentary bring
about division I don't believe so I
believe division comes about from a lack
of sincerity
uh from corruption of people's hearts
from um people not uh giving scholars
the benefit of the doubt that is where
uh division comes from. Now the best
Islam without a shadow of a doubt is the
Islam of the prophet sallallahu alaihi
wasallam and his companions without a
shadow of a doubt. But there are certain
things that we need to understand that
the vast majority of Islamic commentary
was written under the kilafa that it was
only in 1924 when the was dismantled and
all of our tradition for the most part
has been written uh before that. So now
we live in a post kilafa world. How does
that impact us? what things are firm and
stay firm and what things are allowed to
be changed as uh a result of the state
of the the the hardships and calamities
that we face. So just as a simple
example the normal rule is that you pray
five times a day in their appropriate
times. However, due to hardship of
traveling the prophet sallallahu alaihi
wasallam allows us to combine and to
shorten. So as circumstances change then
the uh Allah subhana t allows us
concession and ease. Now what does that
look like in our day and age and that is
why I think scholarly uh commentary on
modern day issues is very very important
is very day is very very important
because they will use the language that
people are familiar with in this day and
age uh with this mindset and they know
which challenges need to be addressed.
So all of Islam has existed and will
continue to exist and will never cease
to exist. And all the criticisms against
the Quran, the prophetam and the dean of
Islam have pretty much all been brought
forth and have been responded to. But in
terms of the language of that response,
not everyone understands it. Not
everyone has access to it. So the
scholars that you have access to, look
for their commentary as well on those
issues that leave your heart unsettled.
That leave your heart unsettled. But
Islam as a whole has no contradictions
in it. Has no contradictions in it. So
that is what I was referring to. Did you
mention uh wipes out sins? No, I did not
mention that
uh wipes out sins. What I was referring
to was the uh was the in in Jamarat that
the throwing of the stones in Jamarat
that uh wipes out major sins or that is
one of the things one of the the
narrations mentions that uh that is one
of the things that wipes out major sins.
So when you go for and of that wipes out
sins uh major sins but all good deeds
that you do will wipe out
sins that good deeds will wipe out uh
sins in case the good deeds does not
benefit non-believers in this world then
what happens Allahhana rewards the
non-Muslims with uh the good that they
do in this world in this world so that
can be with temporary contentness
temporary temporary satisfaction,
temporary wealth, all of that is uh
their reward in the life of this world
and they will not have a shir in the
hereafter up and until uh they become
Muslim. Uh isn't a Jew believe that they
will be touched by not only for a few
days?
There are certain groups that believed
that uh they will not touch the fire at
all or they will only touch it for a few
days because they are the favored
creation uh of Allah subhana wa ta'ala
and this is something delusional because
Allah subhanaa tala has not promised
this them has not promised to them this
in any text and that is why you have to
speak with evidence you have to speak uh
with evidence if you don't have evidence
you don't speak Allah is more and Allah
is mazed isn't it
Yes, is to to see the the beautiful face
of Allah subhana wa ta'ala as Ib Abbas
and others mentioned who are the people
of they are the same ones that went into
the cave and we will discuss the um
thereafter how many surah start with or
which have bismillah.
So every surah in the Quran is preceded
byman with the exception of surah toba
established as as basically number one.
Number two is the statement of actually
a part of the surah or not? They
differed on fath is the first verse ofah
fat or
alhamdulillah. The majority of scholars
said that it is
alhamdulillah. Number three, the only
place in the Quran where is actually a
part of the surah by consensus is inah
when Allah subhana t speaks about the
letter
that wrote
uh in ay one of the surah who comes
before in ay one of it comes in a
reverse uh or uh order uh what is the
significance of this. So in this uh
surah the context of it is that the
Quraysh wanted to come to disprove the
prophethood of the prophet sallallahu
alaihi wasallam. So Allah subhana wa
ta'ala affirms his prophethood and
servitude first and that is why Allah
subhana wa tala refer uh refers to Abdu
uh in in the surah first over here and
Allahhanaa knows best. As for I do not
know the uh exact re reason of
revelation or the context behind the
particular verse. So I I can't comment
on that. But with regards to we know
it's because they doubted the of the
prophetam that thus Allah subhana wa
tala not only accepted his but said that
greater than the is that he Allah I have
accepted
his I have accepted his servitude. And
one of the levels of servitude that the
prophet sallallahu alaihi wasallam has
is of being a nabi and a
rasool. Okay. Um then we have uh another
question. Is ayur only referring to the
specific questions of the Jews um told
Qur to ask the or is it referring to
their whole tradition and religion? No,
it's referring to um so the the part uh
where we say that Allahhana
says that it is to warn uh the Quraysh
the Jews and the Christians because of
attributing partners to Allahhana or
attributing children to Allah subhana wa
ta'ala or the greater sense of shik that
this book and Islam as a whole and the
prophet sallallahu alaihi wasallam they
have all come to warn people against
shik They all come to warn people
against
uh it is in Muslim.
Yes. In terms of the virtue of reciting
every Friday, does recitation without
understanding or remembering the meaning
of the words being recited count? Yes,
it does without a shadow of a doubt. Um
there is virtue in reciting the Quran
even if you don't understand it.
However, the more you understand it, the
more you seek to implement it, then the
greater the reward uh in it, the greater
the reward in it. Uh so you want to try
to maximize your rewards and Allah
subhana wa ta'ala knows
best. My brothers and sisters
uh for your attendance and participation
today. May Allah subhana wa ta'ala bless
all of you and accept from all of you
and make everything that we've heard
today uh a proof for us and not a proof
against us. and allow us to implement uh
the good that we've heard uh in today's
session. Anything that I've said that is
correct is from Allah subhana wa tala
and all praise is due to him. Anything
that I've said that is incorrect is from
myself and I seek forgiveness from Allah
and uh from you.